
INFODOC ID: 14818
SYNOPSIS: How to Add New Disks/Luns/Arrays to a System Without a boot -r
DETAIL DESCRIPTION:

Sometimes it is advantageous to add new hard disks, luns, or entire arrays
without performing a reconfiguration boot (boot -r). In Solaris 2.5.1 and
Solaris 2.6, the only way to add storage was to do a
'drvconfig;devlinks;disks'. In Solaris 8 and Solaris 7 with kernel patch
106541-08 and higher the devfsadm command replaces
'drvconfig;devlinks;xxxxx' and makes adding storage devices on the fly
somewhat easier. For individual storage arrays there are additional
commands that can be used to add the arrays on the fly. For example, the
A5x00 array uses 'luxadm insert' and with Raid Manager 6.22 or higher, luns
can be added with 'hot_add'. This document will outline general procedures
for adding disks, luns, and arrays so that they can be seen in format
without a boot -r. We will also outline some specific examples for adding
specific Sun StorEdge products on the fly.

It is important to note that not all storage can be added hot, so use
discretion when adding new hardware. For example, it would be highly
inadvisable to hot plug a disk to an internal SCSI connection. It is
generally not a problem however to add an external multipack or JBOD disk
array to an external SCSI connector, or to add a fiber channel array to an
FC-AL host bus adapter. This document describes general procedures for
adding hardware while the system is up, but cannot take into account every
possible hardware device or scenario. When in doubt, power down the host
before adding your device!

Also note that any time you add storage on the fly that you will be
controlling with Volume Manager, you should, after verifything that the
storage is seen in the format menu, run the command 'vxdctl enable'. This
command will probe for new disks and luns and make Volume Manager aware of
them. After doing 'vdctl enable' do a 'vxdisk list' to list out all disks
that Volume Manager is aware of. New disks will normally show up as - -
error if they have not been initialized under Volume Manager control
previously.

SOLUTION SUMMARY:
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

General Procedure for Adding Disks and Luns on Solaris 2.5.1, 2.6 and
Solaris 7 with Patch 106541-07 or Lower

Attach the disk or array to the host.

Power on the disk or array if applicable

At the command prompt enter the following command

drvconfig;devlinks;disks

Verify using 'format' that you can see the attached disks or luns.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

General Procedure for Adding Disks and Luns on Solaris 7 with Patch
106541-08 or Higher and Solaris 8

Attach the disk or array to the host.

Power on the disk or array if applicable

Check, using the format command, to verify that the storage isn't already
seen after a minute or two of being powered on. The devfsadmd daemon will
be running in the background and constantly checking for the presence of
new hardware, so often times the device will be found right away. This
would be the expected behavior in a SAN environment for example. If format
does not see the device, continue.

At the command prompt enter the following command:

devfsadm -c disk

Verify using 'format' that you can see the attached disks or luns.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Specific Procedure for Adding A1000 and A3x00 Luns With Raid Manager 6.22
or Higher

Attach the array to the host.

Power on the array.

At the command prompt enter the following command

/usr/lib/osa/bin/hot_add

Verify that the array can be seen from Raid Manager. The /usr/sbin/osa/lad
command should report back the controllers and luns. On an A1000 you might
see something like this:

c1t4d0s0 1T80804597 LUNS: 0 1 2 3 4

Verify using 'format' that you can see the attached luns.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
Specific Procedure for Adding A5x00 Arrays and T3 Luns (volumes)

/usr/sbin/luxadm insert

Please hit <RETURN> when you have finished adding Fibre Channel
Enclosure(s)/Device(s):<return>

Keywords: SEVM, VxVM, Volume Manager, RM6, Sun Enterprise Volume
Manager[TM], install, installing, installation

APPLIES TO: Operating Systems/Solaris/Solaris 2.x, Storage, Storage/RAID
Manager, Storage/Volume Manager
ATTACHMENTS:
