.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997-1999 Tom Schmidt.
.\" This software may be freely distributed provided it is not sold for
.\" profit and the author is credited appropriately.
.\"
.\" $Revision: 1.42 $
.\"
.TH memconf 1M "11 Oct 2001" "Maintenance Commands"
.SH NAME
memconf \- Display information about installed memory
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI memconf
[
.B \-h
] [
.B \-D
] [
.B \-v
] [
.B explorer_dir
] 
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I memconf
is a
.B Perl
script that displays information about the memory installed in the system.  
It reports the size of each SIMM/DIMM memory module installed in the system,
including which motherboard memory slot each is in.
And it also reports the system type and any empty memory sockets.
It works for most Sun SPARC systems running SunOS 4.1.X or Solaris 2.X.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B \-h
Display a small help message.
.TP 8
.B \-D
Send results to
.I memconf
maintainer. This will E-mail the output of "memconf -d", "prtconf -pv" or
"devinfo -pv", and "prtdiag -v" if available to tschmidt@micron.com
.TP 8
.B \-v
Be verbose. In this mode
.I memconf
also reports:  banner name, model, and CPU/system frequencies, as well
as the address range and bank numbers for each memory module.
.TP 8
.B explorer_dir
Uses Sun Explorer output directory for input. You can download Sun
Explorer from http://sunsolve.Sun.COM/diag/explorer/SUNWexplo.tar.Z

.SH WEBSITE
http://www.4schmidts.com/unix.html

.SH BUGS
Please send bug reports and enhancement requests along with the output of
the following commands to tschmidt@micron.com as E\-mail attachments so that
.I memconf
can be enhanced. Please include the Sun Model and Operating System version.
.PP
SunOS 4.1.X
.RS
/usr/etc/devinfo \-pv
.RE
Solaris 2.X
.RS
/usr/sbin/prtconf \-pv
.br
/usr/platform/`uname \-m`/sbin/prtdiag \-v (if available)
.RE
.PP
You can do this using the 'memconf -D' command.
If an unrecognized system is a Sun clone, please also send any hardware
documentation on the memory layout that you may have.

.SH AUTHORS
Tom Schmidt (tschmidt@micron.com)
.br
Based on SunManagers SUMMARY by Howard Modell (h.modell@ieee.org)

.SH SEE ALSO
devinfo(8S), prtconf(1M), prtdiag(1M), perl(1), sysinfo(1)

